Add guide for priority scheduling with RayJob and Kueue (#42903)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/examples/rayjob-kueue-priority-scheduling.md

(kuberay-kueue-priority-scheduling-example)=

# Priority Scheduling with RayJob and Kueue

In this guide, we will run [Fine-tune a PyTorch Lightning Text Classifier with Ray Data](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/train/examples/lightning/lightning_cola_advanced.html) as a RayJob and leverage Kueue to orchestrate priority scheduling and quota management.

## What is Kueue?

[Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/) is a kubernetes-native system that manages quotas
and how jobs consume them. Kueue decides when a job should wait, when a job should be
admitted to start (as in pods can be created) and when a job should be preempted (as in
active pods should be deleted).

Kueue has native support for some of KubeRay's APIs. Specifically, you can use Kueue

> to manage resources consumed by RayJob and RayCluster. See the

Author: It merged very recently but not released yet https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1607

[Kueue documentation](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/overview/) to learn more.

> ## Create a Kubernetes cluster on GKE

Author: > In this section, most of the content is the same as the instructions in kuberay-gke-gpu-cluster-setup. In Ray's philosophy, we want to reuse the instructions in kuberay-gke-gpu-cluster-setup as many as possible. Avoiding multiple copies allows us to only need to update the central documentation in the future.

The bottom of this sections references back to the `kuberay-gke-gpu-cluster-setup` page. 
```
See [this tutorial](kuberay-gke-gpu-cluster-setup) for more details on setting up a Kubernetes cluster on GKE.
```

If you already have a Kubernetes cluster with GPUs, you can skip this step.

Create a GKE cluster with autoscaling enabled:
```bash
gcloud container clusters create kuberay-gpu-cluster \
    --num-nodes=1 --min-nodes 0 --max-nodes 1 --enable-autoscaling \
    --zone=us-west1-b --machine-type e2-standard-4 --cluster-version 1.28
```

Create a GPU node pool:
```bash
gcloud container node-pools create gpu-node-pool \

>   --accelerator type=nvidia-l4,count=2,gpu-driver-version=latest \

Reviewer: We need to remove `gpu-driver-version=latest` and install the NVIDIA driver via [Step 4: Install GPU drivers (optional)](https://anyscale-ray--42903.com.readthedocs.build/en/42903/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/gcp-gke-gpu-cluster.html#step-4-install-gpu-drivers-optional) instead. See https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/42903/files#r1477002737 for more context.

* [ResourceFlavor](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/resource_flavor/): defines what resources are available in the cluster (typically from Nodes)
* [WorkloadPriorityClass](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/workload_priority_class/): defines priority for workloads

In our example we will configure Kueue with just enough quotas to run a single fine-tuning job.
There will be two priority classes `dev-priority` and `prod-priority`. RayJobs using the
`prod-priority` priotiy class should take precedence and preempt any running RayJobs from the `dev-priority`
priority class.

```yaml
# kueue-resources.yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceFlavor
metadata:
  name: "default-flavor"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  preemption:
    reclaimWithinCohort: Any
    withinClusterQueue: LowerPriority
  namespaceSelector: {} # match all.
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "nvidia.com/gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 2
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 8G
      - name: "nvidia.com/gpu"

>         nominalQuota: 1

Author: At some point I started with g2-standard-24, but I switched to g2-standard-4 and just forgot to update the references.

Updated to g2-standard-4

```

Create the Kueue resources:
```bash
kubectl apply -f kueue-resources.yaml
```

## Deploy a RayJob

Download the RayJob that that will execute all the steps documented in [Fine-tune a PyTorch Lightning Text Classifier](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/train/examples/lightning/lightning_cola_advanced.html). The [source code](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/tree/master/ray-operator/config/samples/pytorch-text-classifier) is also in the kuberay repo.

```bash
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/pytorch-text-classifier/ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
```

Before creating the RayJob, modify the RayJob metadata with:
* a label to assign the RayJob to the LocalQueue created earlier.
* a label to assign the RayJob with the `dev-priority` priority class.
* Modify the name to indicate this is a job for development purposes.

```yaml
metadata:
  generateName: dev-pytorch-text-classifier-
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
    kueue.x-k8s.io/priority-class: dev-priority
```

Also note the resources required for this RayJob by looking at the resources requested by the nodes:

> ```yaml

Author: I was playing around with difference requests and instance sizes and forgot to update. Updated to match what's in the KubeRay repo

resources:
  limits:
    cpu: "8"
    memory: "20G"
    nvidia.com/gpu: "1"
  requests:
    cpu: "8"
    memory: "20G"
    nvidia.com/gpu: "1"
```

Now deploy the RayJob:
```bash
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p created
```

> Verify that the RayCluster and Ray job are running:

Author: Done

```bash
$ kubectl get pod
NAME                                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Reviewer: Kubernetes can detect 2 GPUs on the gpu-node-pool node, but the PyTorch can't.

```sh
kubectl get nodes "-o=custom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name,GPU:.status.allocatable.nvidia\.com/gpu"
# NAME                                                  GPU
# gke-kuberay-gpu-cluster-default-pool-775a3b37-qkm0    <none>
# gke-kuberay-gpu-cluster-gpu-node-pool-0375c869-f0mk   2
```

```python
# head Pod
import torch
print("Cuda support:", torch.cuda.is_available(),":", torch.cuda.device_count(), "devices")
```

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Reviewer: I tried to use `rayproject/ray-ml:2.9.0-cu118`, and got the same issue.

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Reviewer: There is no `nvidia-smi` binary.

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Reviewer: I identified the root cause. I removed `gpu-driver-version=latest` from the `gcloud container node-pools create gpu-node-pool` command and installed the GPU drivers via [Step 4: Install GPU drivers (optional)](https://anyscale-ray--42903.com.readthedocs.build/en/42903/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/gcp-gke-gpu-cluster.html#step-4-install-gpu-drivers-optional). The `gpu-driver-version=latest` behavior seems to be a GKE bug.

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Author: hmm... yeah you shouldn't need to install the GPU driver unless there was an issue. What GKE version were you using?

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Author: I ran into this issue even without `gpu-driver-version=latest`. Weird because I didn't have GPU driver issues last week.

I'll file a bug report on this. For now I'll link to the steps to re-install the GPU driver if there's an issue

> dev-pytorch-text-classifier-r6d4p-4nczg                   1/1     Running   0          4s

Author: @kevin85421 I tested this again with `gpu-driver-version=latest` and it worked. Some folks on the GKE team mentioned that  `gpu-driver-version=latest` is required for L4s at the moment. I added `gpu-driver-version=latest` back for now but let's revisit if you continue to see issues with L4 GPUs even with `gpu-driver-version=latest`.

torch-text-classifier-r6d4p-raycluster-br45j-head-8bbwt   1/1     Running   0          34s
```

> 

Reviewer: Add a paragraph to check `JobStatus` and `JobDeploymentStatus` and explain the expected values of them. In addition, we should also explain why the RayCluster is deleted after the RayJob is complete. Otherwise, users feel confusing why does the RayCluster disappear.

```
kubectl get rayjobs.ray.io pytorch-text-classifier-${RANDOM_STRING} -o jsonpath='{.status.jobDeploymentStatus}'
kubectl get rayjobs.ray.io pytorch-text-classifier-${RANDOM_STRING} -o jsonpath='{.status.jobStatus}'
```

Author: Added this.

Note to self: when we update to v1.1.0, we can just show output of `kubectl get rayjobs` which will show job and job deployment status

> 

Reviewer: Delete the RayJob after the RayJob completes to make the result of each step in the next section "Queuing Multiple RayJob custom resources" more predictable.

> ### Queuing Multiple RayJobs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Queuing Multiple RayJob custom resources
```

You can create multiple RayJobs to see how Kueue interacts with Kuberay to implement queueing.
```bash
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/dev-pytorch-text-classifier-8vg2c created
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/dev-pytorch-text-classifier-n5k89 created
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/dev-pytorch-text-classifier-ftcs9 created
```

> Because our `ClusterQueue` was configured with only quotas for 1 RayJob, Kueue will automatically suspend new RayJobs

Reviewer: > our `ClusterQueue` was configured with only quotas for 1 RayJob

There are some Kueue-specific logics behind this statement. We should add more details about it. For example, "because a RayJob requires X resources and the Kueue only allows Y because ClusterQueue ...."

Author: Good suggestion, updated to:
```
Because each RayJob requests 1 GPU and our ClusterQueue has quotas for only 1 GPU,
Kueue will automatically suspend new RayJob resources until quotas free up.
```

until there is sufficient quotas available.

You can also inspect the `ClusterQueue` to see available / used quotas:
```bash
$ kubectl get clusterqueue
NAME            COHORT   PENDING WORKLOADS

> cluster-queue            5

Reviewer: We should make the result more predictable so that users can verify whether they are on the right track or not. That's why I decide to change "multiple" to "3". See https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/42903/files#r1476909906 for more details.

```suggestion
cluster-queue            2
```

Author: done

$ kubectl get clusterqueue  cluster-queue -o yaml

> apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1

Reviewer: How should the information be interpreted? Users may feel confused if we present the information without any explanation.

kind: ClusterQueue
...
...
...
status:
  admittedWorkloads: 1
  flavorsReservation:
  - name: default-flavor
    resources:
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: cpu
      total: "8"
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: memory
      total: 19531250Ki
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: nvidia.com/gpu
      total: "2"
  flavorsUsage:
  - name: default-flavor
    resources:
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: cpu
      total: "8"
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: memory
      total: 19531250Ki
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: nvidia.com/gpu
      total: "2"
  pendingWorkloads: 5
  reservingWorkloads: 1
```

## Deploy a RayJob with Higher Priority

> At this point we have multiple RayJobs queued up but only enough quota to run a single RayJob.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, we have multiple RayJob custom resources queued up but only enough quota to run a single RayJob.
```

> Now we can create a new RayJob with higer priority to preempty the already queued Rayjobs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can create a new RayJob with higer priority to preempt the already queued RayJob custom resources.
```

To do this, modify the RayJob with:
* a label to assign the RayJob to the LocalQueue created earlier.
* a label to assign the RayJob with the `prod-priority` priority class.
* Modify the name to indicate this is a job for prod purposes.

```yaml
metadata:
  generateName: prod-pytorch-text-classifier-
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
    kueue.x-k8s.io/priority-class: prod-priority
```

Create the new RayJob:
```sh
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/prod-pytorch-text-classifier-gkp9b created
```

Note that higher priority jobs will preempt lower priority jobs when there is not enough quotas for both:
```bash

> $ kubectl get po 

Reviewer: I know it works, but let's keep it consistent with the other documents.

```suggestion
$ kubectl get pods
```

NAME                                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
prod-pytorch-text-classifier-gkp9b-r9k5r                  1/1     Running   0          5s
torch-text-classifier-gkp9b-raycluster-s2f65-head-hfvht   1/1     Running   0          35s
```

## Increasing Cluster Quotas

As a final step, we can control the quotas available by modifying the ClusterQueue.

> Increasing the quotas will signal to Kueue that it can admit more RayJobs. In the event that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Increasing the quotas will signal to Kueue that it can admit more RayJob custom resources. In the event that
```

> there is no resources available to schcedule new RayJobs, the cluster autoscaler will

Reviewer: The term "cluster autoscaler" may be very confusing for users in the context of Ray.

```suggestion
there is no resources available to schcedule new RayJob custom resources, the Kubernetes node autoscaler, such as GKE Autopilot, will
```

add additional nodes if enabled.
```yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  preemption:
    reclaimWithinCohort: Any
    withinClusterQueue: LowerPriority
  namespaceSelector: {} # match all.
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "nvidia.com/gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 100
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 100Gi
      - name: "nvidia.com/gpu"
        nominalQuota: 10
```

> RayJobs queued from the previous steps are now admitted by Kueue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RayJob custom resources queued from the previous steps are now admitted by Kueue:
```

Author: Done

```bash

> $ kubectl get po

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl get pods
```

Author: done

* [ResourceFlavor](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/resource_flavor/): defines what resources are available in the cluster (typically from Nodes)
* [WorkloadPriorityClass](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/workload_priority_class/): defines priority for workloads

In this example, Kueue will be configured with just enough quotas to run a single fine-tuning RayJob.
There are two priority classes `dev-priority` and `prod-priority`. RayJobs using the
`prod-priority` priority class should take precedence and preempt any running RayJobs from the `dev-priority`
priority class.

```yaml
# kueue-resources.yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceFlavor
metadata:
  name: "default-flavor"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  preemption:
    reclaimWithinCohort: Any
    withinClusterQueue: LowerPriority
  namespaceSelector: {} # match all.
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "nvidia.com/gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 2
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 8G

>       - name: "nvidia.com/gpu" # ClusterQueue only has quota for a single GPU

Reviewer 2: Just making consistent with previous comment. Suggest either use period for every comment, or no periods for every comment.

$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/dev-pytorch-text-classifier-ftcs9 created
```

Because each RayJob requests 1 GPU and the ClusterQueue has quotas for only 1 GPU,
Kueue automatically suspends new RayJob resources until GPU quotas become available.

You can also inspect the `ClusterQueue` to see available / used quotas:
```bash
$ kubectl get clusterqueue
NAME            COHORT   PENDING WORKLOADS
cluster-queue            2
$ kubectl get clusterqueue  cluster-queue -o yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
...
...
...
status:
  admittedWorkloads: 1  # workloads admitted by queue
  flavorsReservation:
  - name: default-flavor
    resources:
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: cpu
      total: "8"
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: memory
      total: 19531250Ki
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: nvidia.com/gpu
      total: "2"
  flavorsUsage:
  - name: default-flavor
    resources:
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: cpu
      total: "8"
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: memory
      total: 19531250Ki
    - borrowed: "0"
      name: nvidia.com/gpu
      total: "2"
  pendingWorkloads: 2   # queued workloads waiting for quotas

>   reservingWorkloads: 1 # running workloads that are using quotas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  reservingWorkloads: 1 # Running workloads that are using quotas.
```

```

> ## Deploy a RayJob with Higher Priority

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Deploy a RayJob with higher priority
```

At this point there are multiple RayJob custom resources queued up but only enough quota to run a single RayJob.
Now you can create a new RayJob with higher priority to preempt the already queued RayJob resources.

> To do this, modify the RayJob with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modify the RayJob with:
```

> * a label to assign the RayJob to the LocalQueue created earlier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A label to assign the RayJob to the LocalQueue created earlier.
```

> * a label to assign the RayJob with the `prod-priority` priority class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A label to assign the RayJob with the `prod-priority` priority class.
```

> * Modify the name to indicate this is a job for prod purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A modified name to indicate that this job is for production purposes.
```

```yaml
metadata:
  generateName: prod-pytorch-text-classifier-
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
    kueue.x-k8s.io/priority-class: prod-priority
```

Create the new RayJob:
```sh
$ kubectl create -f ray-job.pytorch-distributed-training.yaml
rayjob.ray.io/prod-pytorch-text-classifier-gkp9b created
```

> Note that higher priority jobs preempt lower priority jobs when there isn't enough quotas for both:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that higher priority jobs preempt lower priority jobs when there aren't enough quotas for both:
```

```bash
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
prod-pytorch-text-classifier-gkp9b-r9k5r                  1/1     Running   0          5s
torch-text-classifier-gkp9b-raycluster-s2f65-head-hfvht   1/1     Running   0          35s
```

> ## Increasing Cluster Quotas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Increasing cluster quotas
```

> As a final step, the quotas available can be controlled by modifying the ClusterQueue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a final step, you can control the quotas available by modifying the ClusterQueue.
```

Increasing the quotas signals to Kueue that it can admit more RayJob resources.

> In the event that there is no resources available to schedule new RayJobs, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If no resources are available to schedule new RayJobs, the
```

> Kubernetes node autoscaler, such as GKE Autopilot, adds additional nodes if enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes node autoscaler, such as GKE Autopilot, adds additional nodes. You must enable the autoscaler to have this behavior.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  preemption:
    reclaimWithinCohort: Any
    withinClusterQueue: LowerPriority

>   namespaceSelector: {} # match all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  namespaceSelector: {} # Match all.
```
